Initial research for configuration versioning (#163)
packit/research: configuration-versioning/README.md

# Configuration versioning

Example use cases we would like to solve with this:

- Example 1: Image builder job - it will probably evolve over time depending on the requirements
- [Example 2](https://github.com/packit/packit.dev/issues/443): Changing interpretation of job overrides from replacing the values to merging

## Existing support

- no support from Marshmallow, [see](https://github.com/marshmallow-code/marshmallow/issues/1107)
- in general, I have not found any existing support to do this
- some tips from the issue above:
  - utilising `render_module` (from [this class](https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/3.0/api_reference.html#marshmallow.Schema.Meta)) - a class that defines loads and dumps, which defaults to json,
    could be a good place to intercept the raw data on a per-schema basis
  - migrating the raw data before deserializing to avoid maintaining a schema history

## Versioning jobs aside from the whole config

- since we have the inheritance CommonPackageConfig <- PackageConfig and JobConfig and all the job-related fields

>   in the job config together, this would be really messy

Reviewer: Yes, this was changed. There is no inheritance between these classes.

    image_account_id = fields.String(missing=None)
    packages_to_install = fields.String(missing=None)
    owner = fields.String(missing=None)
    project = fields.String(missing=None)
```

and the config object would have all the fields and the code could handle both

- from the coding perspective this would not be a problem - the version would be detected either from whole config
  or directly from the `image_builder_metadata`
- but this may be confusing to users - versioning some configuration field apart from the whole config,
  on the other hand it would be independent on the rest of the package config

## Implementation details

### Versioning

- for each backwards incompatible change, we would bump the version
- version would default to 1 (if not present)
- this would be properly documented, we can get inspired by Docker,
  [see](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-versioning/#versioning), the documentation
  would also include Packit version that starts supporting the particular configuration schema

### Having more schemas vs having one schema

#### Having more schemas

- maintaining more versions of schema for whole package config should not be needed

>   - the schemas would be mostly have the same content, only with difference in few fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - the schemas would mostly have the same content, only with differences in a few fields
```

  creating nested schema (as described for Example 1)
- the coding around would be pretty straightforward, detect the version
  and use the correct schema for loading/dumping accordingly

#### Having one schema

- in case of Example 2, the schema itself doesn't change
- we could use the `pre_load` and `pre_dump` (we already use these) to migrate the data:

```python
    @staticmethod
    def propagate_options_to_jobs(data, **_):
        """
        add all the fields (except for jobs) to every job so we can process only jobconfig in p-s
        """
        if not data:  # data is None when .packit.yaml is empty
            return data
        for job in data.get("jobs", []):
            for k, v in data.items():
                if k == "jobs":
                    # overriding jobs doesn't make any sense
                    continue
                if self.version == 1:
                    job.setdefault(k, v)
                elif self.version == 2:
                     # merge the values from top-level and the particular job
                ...

        return data
```

- we would need to make sure that load-dump-load results in same representation

## Plan

> - decide whether/to which scope we want to do this in relation to [this issue](https://github.com/packit/research/issues/159)

Reviewer 3: I feel like that as a part of #159 we will be able to do mainly simple changes (such as renaming). There may, however, be more complex changes to be made which we can't do automatically, as you mention later. I see one slight conflict of this with versioning. Imagine the following scenario:

1) user has a config of version `1`
2) we make a backwards incompatible change which cannot be handled automatically for users using this feature, they need to update manually to schema version `2`. But let's suppose that the user doesn't do this
3) We rename a field in the config, resulting in schema version `3`. We would be able to create a PR for this but we can't. Going version `1` -> `3` could break things because we can't "migrate" to changes done in `2`.

Reviewer 3: That shouldn't really be a problem to implement but it will be another requirement for the automatic updates to take this into consideration

Author: yes, you are right, I just wanted to mention this in the research since it is somehow related

Reviewer: Another option is to drop #159 once versioning is implemented.

  - if we would introduce some change that would break the compatibility, we would open PRs for each repository that
    uses the particular configuration field
  - this could not be sufficient for all use cases

> - decide whether we want to version whole config or just have versioned fields or use combination

Reviewer 4: Versioning jobs or sections sound appealing although I am concerned about usability for users. Even right now, many of our users still use deprecated options (including us!) so we should minimize the number of changes needed to be done to packit.yaml.

Once Hunor finishes his config changes related to monorepo, I wonder how will those changes impact this research.

Author: > Versioning jobs or sections sound appealing although I am concerned about usability for users.

I agree, it could be simpler from an implementation pov, but very confusing to users.

Reviewer: Versioning sections of the schema has the strong potential of creating a very confusing and difficult to follow environment both for developers and users. I'm strongly against going in this direction.

### Having more schemas vs having one schema

#### Having more schemas

- maintaining more versions of schema for whole package config should not be needed
  - the schemas would mostly have the same content, only with differences in a few fields
- this approach could be used for smaller parts of the configuration, e.g.
  creating nested schema (as described for Example 1)
- the coding around would be pretty straightforward, detect the version
  and use the correct schema for loading/dumping accordingly

#### Having one schema

- in case of Example 2, the schema itself doesn't change
- we could use the `pre_load` and `pre_dump` (we already use these) to migrate the data:

```python
    @staticmethod
    def propagate_options_to_jobs(data, **_):
        """
        add all the fields (except for jobs) to every job so we can process only jobconfig in p-s
        """
        if not data:  # data is None when .packit.yaml is empty
            return data
        for job in data.get("jobs", []):
            for k, v in data.items():
                if k == "jobs":
                    # overriding jobs doesn't make any sense
                    continue

>                 if self.version == 1:

Reviewer: Doing this in the `pre_load` step seems late to me, and will make code more and more complicated over time.

I would rather do something like: check the version in `PackageConfig.get_from_dict()` (default to some pre-defined version if the version is not specified – the last one could be a good candidate) and then import the schema classes matching that version:

```python
if version == "1":
    from packit.schema.v1 import PackageConfigSchema
elif version == "2":
    from packit.schema.v2 import PackageConfigSchema
```

This would allow partially redefining schema classes or reexporting existing schema classes. For example in `packit.schema.v2` one could have:

```python
from packit.schema.v1 import PackageConfigSchema as PackageConfigSchemaV1
# reexport as v2, without a change
from packit.schema.v1 import JobConfig

class PackageConfigSchema(PackageConfigSchemaV1):
    # override some fields
```

Would something like this make sense?

Author: yes, this makes sense, I will incorporate it into the document
